Fixes #9615 - Update language mode docs (#9669)
MicrosoftDocs/PowerShell-Docs: reference/7.3/Microsoft.PowerShell.Core/About/about_Language_Modes.md

## Long description

The language mode of a PowerShell session determines which elements of the
PowerShell language can be used in the session.

PowerShell supports the following language modes:

- `FullLanguage`
- `RestrictedLanguage`
- `ConstrainedLanguage` (introduced in PowerShell 3.0)
- `NoLanguage`

## What is a language mode?

The language mode determines the language elements that are permitted in the
session.

The language mode is a property of the session configuration (or "endpoint")
that's used to create the session. All sessions that use a particular session
configuration have the language mode of the session configuration.

> All PowerShell sessions have a language mode. Remote sessions are created using
> the session configurations on the remote computer. The language mode set in the
> session configuration determines the language mode of the session. To specify
> the session configuration of a PSSession, use the **ConfigurationName**
> parameter of cmdlets that create a session.

Reviewer: Suggest using target instead of remote here since they can be used for local sessions too.
```suggestion
All PowerShell sessions have a language mode. Sessions are created using the
session configurations on the target computer. The language mode set in the
session configuration determines the language mode of the session. To specify
the session configuration of a PSSession, use the **ConfigurationName**
parameter of cmdlets that create a session.
```

Beginning in PowerShell 7.3, you can run `pwsh` with the **ConfigurationFile**
parameter. This allows you to start PowerShell using a specific configuration.

## Finding the language mode of a session

You can find the language mode of a `FullLanguage` or `ConstrainedLanguage`
session by getting the value of the **LanguageMode** property of the session
state.

For example:

```powershell
$ExecutionContext.SessionState.LanguageMode
ConstrainedLanguage
```

However, in sessions with `RestrictedLanguage` and `NoLanguage` modes, you

> can't use the dot method to get property values. Instead, the error message

Reviewer: Suggest referencing the operator by name and linking.
```suggestion
can't use the [member-access operator](about_member-access_enumeration.md) (`.`) to get property values. Instead, the error message
```

reveals the language mode.

When you run the `$ExecutionContext.SessionState.LanguageMode` command in a
`RestrictedLanguage` session, PowerShell returns the
**PropertyReferenceNotSupportedInDataSection** and
**VariableReferenceNotSupportedInDataSection** error messages.

- **PropertyReferenceNotSupportedInDataSection**: Property references aren't
  allowed in restricted language mode or a Data section.
- **VariableReferenceNotSupportedInDataSection**: A variable that can't be
  referenced in restricted language mode or a Data section is being

>   referenced.

Reviewer: Should these be in blockquotes or wrapped as code to make it more clear that they're verbatim messages?

Author: Not necessary for this purpose. I would rather leave it as is for now. We have never had any confusion about it .

When you run the `$ExecutionContext.SessionState.LanguageMode` command in a
NoLanguage session, PowerShell returns the **ScriptsNotAllowed** error message.

- **ScriptsNotAllowed**: The syntax isn't supported by this runspace. This
  might be because it's in no-language mode.

## Finding the language mode of a session configuration

When a session configuration is created using a session configuration file, the
session configuration has a **LanguageMode** property. You can find the
language mode by getting the value of the **LanguageMode** property.

```powershell
(Get-PSSessionConfiguration -Name Test).LanguageMode
FullLanguage
```

On other session configurations, you can find the language mode indirectly by
finding the language mode of a session that's created using the session
configuration.

## Setting the language mode

> The language mode in a PowerShell session can be set through the built in

Reviewer: Nit: I think we normally hyphenate this term.
```suggestion
The language mode in a PowerShell session can be set through the built-in
```

`$ExecutionContext` variable.

```powershell
$ExecutionContext.SessionState.LanguageMode = "ConstrainedLanguage"
```

However, doing this is only useful for experimenting with language modes.
Language modes are intended to provide added security to PowerShell sessions
for specific contexts.

Languages modes are set when you use a system application control policy or
create a session configuration.

### Using a system application control policy

PowerShell automatically runs in `ConstrainedLanguage` mode when it's running
under a system application control policy. The application control
policies detected are AppLocker and Windows Defender Application Control (WDAC)
on Windows platforms.

PowerShell applies other restrictions besides language modes when it detects an
application control policy. For example, there are additional restrictions to
dot-sourcing and module importing under a policy.

> When a PowerShell session is started under a policy, it runs in
> `ConstrainedLanguage` mode. Beginning in PowerShell 7.4, the start up banner
> display includes a message indicating it's running in that mode. This allows
> users to have a usable interactive shell experience, running cmdlets and native
> commands, as well as access to basic language elements. But the user can't
> access PowerShell, .NET, or COM APIs that could be abused by a malicious actor.

Reviewer: Nit: Should the note about 7.4 be included in this version?

Suggesting a reword of the second part of the paragraph:
```suggestion
When a PowerShell session is started under a policy, it runs in
`ConstrainedLanguage` mode. Beginning in PowerShell 7.4, the start up banner
display includes a message indicating it's running in that mode. This mode
allows for a usable interactive shell experience while limiting access to
features and APIs that could be abused by a malicious actor. Users can run
cmdlets and native commands and have access to basic language elements. Access
to PowerShell, .NET, and COM APIs is restricted.
```
Something about the construction was a little difficult for me to parse. The intent of this rewrite is to consolidate the message (usable interactive shell, limited functionality) and then clarify the availability.

Any script or script-based module executed in this session runs in
`ConstrainedLanguage` mode. However, any script or script-based module allowed
by the policy runs in `FullLanguage` mode without any constraints. This way, a
system locked down by policy can have scripts that are trusted by the policy
and run with few constraints.

### Using a session configuration

> PowerShell remoting optionally supports creating custom session configurations.
> configuration. You can set the language mode you want for that custom
> configuration. PowerShell Just Enough Administration (JEA) configurations use
> `NoLanguage` mode to restrict sessions to command invocation only. With JEA,
> the remote session can be restricted to specific users. The JEA users are
> limited to running a defined set of commands and can't directly access APIs,
> the file system, or other system resources.

Reviewer: Removing a duplicated word and making `invocation` plural.
```suggestion
PowerShell remoting optionally supports creating custom session configurations.
You can set the language mode you want for that custom configuration.
PowerShell Just Enough Administration (JEA) configurations use `NoLanguage`
mode to restrict sessions to command invocations only. With JEA, the remote
session can be restricted to specific users. The JEA users are limited to
running a defined set of commands and can't directly access APIs, the file
system, or other system resources.
```

For more information, see [JEA Session configurations][01] and
[New-PSSessionConfigurationFile][04].

## Language mode features and limitations

This section describes the language modes in PowerShell sessions.

### FullLanguage mode

The `FullLanguage` mode permits all language elements in the session.
`FullLanguage` is the default language mode for default sessions on all

> versions of Windows.

Reviewer: Is there a different language mode default for Linux/macOS? Given the new **ConfigurationFile** parameter, that might be worth clarifying in 7.3+ at least.

Author: No. The default is always `FullLanguage`. Policies only apply to Windows. Configurations can be used on any platform.

### RestrictedLanguage mode

The `RestrictedLanguage` mode was created for Windows RT, which is no longer
supported. This mode still exists, but it's deprecated and no longer used.

In `RestrictedLanguage` mode, users can run commands (cmdlets, functions, CIM
commands, and workflows), but can't use script blocks.

Beginning in PowerShell 7.2, the `New-Object` cmdlet is disabled in
`RestrictedLanguage` mode when system lockdown is configured.

By default, only the following variables are permitted in
`RestrictedLanguage` mode:

- `$PSCulture`
- `$PSUICulture`
- `$True`
- `$False`
- `$Null`

Module manifests that use `RestrictedLanguage` mode allow the following

> additional variables:

Reviewer: This language change (`manifests, which` -> `manifests that`) implies that this is an opt-in behavior rather than how manifests work - is that correct? Is there a way to limit the change what language mode the manifests are loaded in?

Author: Should probably say "modules manifests for modules loaded in `RestrictedLanguage` mode ..."

**VariableReferenceNotSupportedInDataSection** error messages.

- **PropertyReferenceNotSupportedInDataSection**: Property references aren't
  allowed in restricted language mode or a Data section.
- **VariableReferenceNotSupportedInDataSection**: A variable that can't be
  referenced in restricted language mode or a Data section is being
  referenced.

When you run the `$ExecutionContext.SessionState.LanguageMode` command in a
NoLanguage session, PowerShell returns the **ScriptsNotAllowed** error message.

- **ScriptsNotAllowed**: The syntax isn't supported by this runspace. This
  might be because it's in no-language mode.

## Finding the language mode of a session configuration

When a session configuration is created using a session configuration file, the
session configuration has a **LanguageMode** property. You can find the
language mode by getting the value of the **LanguageMode** property.

```powershell
(Get-PSSessionConfiguration -Name Test).LanguageMode
FullLanguage
```

On other session configurations, you can find the language mode indirectly by
finding the language mode of a session that's created using the session
configuration.

> > [!NOTE]

Reviewer 2: Actually, this is no longer true.  Starting with PS 7.3.0 you can start a PowerShell console session and configure that session by passing in a configuration file path.

```
-ConfigurationFile

    Specifies a session configuration (.pssc) file path. The configuration
    contained in the configuration file will be applied to the PowerShell
    session.

    Example: "pwsh -ConfigurationFile "C:\ProgramData\PowerShell\MyConfig.pssc"
```

Author: Thanks, I will update this.

> Session configurations are a feature of WSMan-based PowerShell remoting.
> They're used only when you use the `New-PSSession`, `Invoke-Command`, or
> `Enter-PSSession` cmdlets to connect to a remote Windows computer. The
> `Get-PSSessionConfiguration` cmdlet is only available on Windows computers.

## Setting the language mode

The language mode in a PowerShell session can be set through the built in
`$ExecutionContext` variable.

```powershell
$ExecutionContext.SessionState.LanguageMode = "ConstrainedLanguage"
```

However, doing this is only useful for experimenting with language modes.
Language modes are intended to provide added security to PowerShell sessions
for specific contexts.

Languages modes are set when you use a system application control policy or
create a session configuration.

### Using a system application control policy

PowerShell automatically runs in `ConstrainedLanguage` mode when it's running

> under a system application control policy. The only application control

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
under a system application control policy. The application control
```

policies detected are AppLocker and Windows Defender Application Control (WDAC)
on Windows platforms.

PowerShell applies other restrictions besides language modes when it detects an
application control policy. For example, there are additional restrictions to
dot-sourcing and module importing under a policy.

When a PowerShell session is started under a policy, it runs in
`ConstrainedLanguage` mode. Beginning in PowerShell 7.4, the start up banner

> displays the that it's running in that mode. This allows users to have a usable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
display includes a message indicating it is running in that mode. This allows users to have a usable
```

interactive shell experience, running cmdlets and native commands, as well as
access to basic language elements. But the user can't access PowerShell, .NET,
or COM APIs that could be abused by a malicious actor.

> Any script or script-based module executed in this session run in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any script or script-based module executed in this session runs in
```

`ConstrainedLanguage` mode. However, any script or script-based module allowed
by the policy runs in `FullLanguage` mode without any constraints. This way, a
system locked down by policy can have scripts that are trusted by the policy

> and run without constraints.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and run with few constraints.
```

Reviewer 3: The dot-sourcing across language modes seems the most common constraint encountered.

Reviewer 2: Also restrictions in module importing.  Not technically language element, but users probably don't care about that.

### Using a session configuration

> To support remote PowerShell sessions you have to create a session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PowerShell remoting optionally supports creating custom session configurations.
```

> configuration. You can set the language mode you want for that configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
configuration. You can set the language mode you want for that custom configuration.
```

PowerShell Just Enough Administration (JEA) configurations use `NoLanguage`

> mode. With JEA, the remote session can be restricted to specific users. The JEA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mode to restrict sessions to command invocation only. With JEA, the remote session can be restricted to specific users. The JEA
```

> users are restricted to running a defined set of commands and can't access

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
users are limited to running a defined set of commands and can't directly access
```

> APIs, the file system, or other PowerShell drives.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
APIs, the file system, or other system resources.
```

- `-gt` (greater-than)
- `-lt` (less-than)

Assignment statements, property references, and method calls aren't
permitted.

### ConstrainedLanguage mode

`ConstrainedLanguage` mode is designed to allow basic language elements such as
loops, conditionals, string expansion, and access to object properties. The
restrictions prevent operations that could be abused by a malicious actor.

The `ConstrainedLanguage` mode permits all cmdlets and a subset of PowerShell
language elements, but limits the object types that can be used.

The features of `ConstrainedLanguage` mode are as follows:

- All cmdlets in Windows modules are fully functional and have complete access
  to system resources, except as noted.
- All elements of the PowerShell scripting language are permitted.
- All modules included in Windows can be imported and all commands that the

>   modules export run in the session.

Reviewer: Nit: This seems like it could be combined with the first bullet.

Also, if language modes work at all on not-Windows, I assume it's only the commands that ship in PowerShell that are available?

- The `Add-Type` cmdlet can load signed assemblies, but it can't load arbitrary
  C# code or Win32 APIs.
- The `New-Object` cmdlet can be used only on allowed types (listed below).
- Only allowed types can be used in PowerShell. Other types aren't permitted.
  Type conversion is permitted, but only when the result is an allowed type.
- Cmdlet parameters that convert string input to types work only when the
  resulting type is an allowed type.
- The `ToString()` method and the .NET methods of allowed types can be invoked.
- Users can get all properties of allowed types. Users can set the values of
  properties only on allowed types.

The following .NET types are permitted in `ConstrainedLanguage` mode. Users can

> get properties, invoke methods, and convert objects to these types.

Reviewer: I see that the types for files and folders are missing, am I correct in understanding that I therefore couldn't do `(Get-Item ./file.yaml).LastWriteTime` then? Is this list accurate/up-to-date?

Author: Need to re-verify the list of types.
```
PS> $ExecutionContext.SessionState.LanguageMode = "ConstrainedLanguage"
PS> (dir .\.editorconfig).LastAccessTime

Monday, January 9, 2023 11:11:16 AM
```

- `-gt` (greater-than)
- `-lt` (less-than)

Assignment statements, property references, and method calls aren't
permitted.

### ConstrainedLanguage mode

`ConstrainedLanguage` mode is designed to allow basic language elements such as
loops, conditionals, string expansion, and access to object properties. The
restrictions prevent operations that could be abused by a malicious actor.

> The `ConstrainedLanguage` mode permits all cmdlets and all PowerShell language

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ConstrainedLanguage` mode permits all cmdlets and a subset of PowerShell language
```
